by two-thirds that study
they tested people
i think that is uh the prime minister
coming in right now so let's
listen to boris johnson in downing
street good afternoon and thank you for
joining us today the national
vaccination program
continues to power past the target we
set
six weeks ago with more than 15 million
people vaccinated
across the uk and once again i pay
tribute to the
astonishing efforts of everybody
involved
the gps the nurses the volunteers the
army
and the pharmacists like hardik desai
who rallied local volunteers to
vaccinate 3000 people
in his village hall enticehurst in
sussex while keeping
his pharmacy open and of course i thank
all of you
who have come forward to be vaccinated
this is an unprecedented national
achievement
but it's no moment to relax
and in fact it's the moment to
accelerate because
the threat from this virus remains very
real
yes it's true we vaccinated more than 90
percent
of those aged over 70 but don't forget
that 60 percent of hospital patients
with covet
are under 70 and although the
vaccination program
is going well we still don't have enough
data
about the exact effectiveness of the
vaccines in reducing
the spread of infection we have some
interesting
straws in the wind we have grounds for
confidence
but the vaccinations have only been
running for a matter of weeks
and while we're learning the whole time
we don't
today as i talk to you today we don't
have all the hard facts
that we need and the level of infection
remains very high with still
more people today more people still in
hospital today
than in the uh at the peak last april
and admissions across the uk very
important statistic emissions running
at 1600 a day so
we have to keep our foot to the floor
and i can tell you that today
the next million letters are landing on
people's mats right now offering
appointments to the over 65s
and we're also contacting all those aged
between 16 and 64 with underlying health
conditions
as well as adult carers and if we can
keep this pace up and
if we can keep supply steady and i hope
and believe
we can then we hope to offer a
vaccination to
everyone in the first nine priority
groups
including everyone over 50
by the end of april and at the same time
we will be giving
second doses to millions of the most
vulnerable within 12 weeks
of the first so this moment is a huge
step forward but it's only a first step
and
while it shows what the country can do
we must be
both optimistic but also patient
and next week i'll be sending out a road
map saying as much as we possibly can
about the route to normality
and even though some things are very
uncertain because we want
this lockdown to be the last
and we want progress to be cautious
but also irreversible so please continue
to stay at home protect the nhs and save
lives
thank you very much i'm not going to ask
chris to do the slides thank you prime
minister
first slide please three slides today
the first one
is just showing the number of people
testing positive
for covid over time and as you can see
on this graph
the numbers are coming down steadily
over time
but they're still at quite a high level
and above the point where it was for
example in september last year
so significant progress but i'm still
quite high next slide please
if we look at people in hospital in the
uk
these this again is coming down of
course this follows slightly later than
the
rates of new cases again
the rates are still very high so they're
around the point
in fact slightly above the point which
they were at the peak
of the epidemic in april of last year
so these are still very high rates but
they're definitely heading in the right
direction
next slide please and finally
on deaths uh the number of people who've
sadly died uh with kovid remains
high but is continuing to go down so the
most recent
seven day average uh was 657 deaths
still a very high number but definitely
heading in the right direction
this is now below the peak of the first
wave
we had last year
last slide please and this slide just
shows
the steady improvement in the number of
people being vaccinated thanks to the
extraordinary work of people
in the nhs the people that the prime
minister is talking about
and i'd very much like to add as
everyone would huge thanks to the
doctors
nurses volunteers and administrative
people who are in making this happen
it is an extraordinary achievement now i
want to just finally to
say how the protection from vaccination
will build because it doesn't all happen
in one go the first layer of protection
is people being protected by their first
vaccine but remember this only
starts to work sometime between two and
three weeks later people are not
immediately protected then people will
have a
second vaccine and that will strengthen
the level of protection
and also make it more long-lasting so it
is absolutely essential that when people
are asked to go back for their second
vaccine they do so
the third layer of protection out is uh
we're confident that these vaccines will
produce some level
of protection from transmission we don't
yet know exactly how much
so if people who are vulnerable
meet other people who are vaccinated
that will provide
another layer of protection for them and
finally
further out once we have a high
proportion of the population vaccinated
this will help to reduce the rates of
transmission reduce the risks of big
surges
so this also provides a level of
protection so
vaccinate the more we vaccinate out in
the community the more we protect those
uh who are potentially vulnerable thank
you very much
thanks very much chris let's uh go to
simon stevens who's
uh nhs staff have been doing the the
lion's share of of this vaccination
cabin simon
thank you prime minister 15 million
vaccinations in 10 weeks would be
an enormous undertaking at any time but
doing so
during the course of this surge of
winter coronavirus
when the health service has been under
the most intense pressure
and hospitals have looked after more
than a hundred thousand severely ill
coronavirus patients in just the last
month
that really has been an extraordinary
national team
effort and for families and patients
across the country
you've been able to see for yourselves
the speed and the precision
with which the vaccination campaign has
been undertaken
so i joined the prime minister and the
chief medical officer in
thanking everybody who's been involved
of course
our gps our nurses our pharmacists
the entire staff of the health service
but also our partners
the volunteers the local authorities the
local businesses the armed forces and
many others who've rallied around
to get us to the place that we are today
but today as brian's said is definitely
not a mission accomplished
i've described the vaccination campaign
as two sprints and a marathon
we've just come through the finishing
line of the first sprint
and now we've got a second sprint
between now and the 30th of april
to extend the number of vaccinations
given to
the higher risk groups of the population
before then
moving on to the marathon which will be
vaccination for
everybody in the country who's eligible
as well as
the winter flu campaign and potentially
further covert booster shots uh this
autumn if that's what the science
suggests is needed so perhaps i can just
spend a moment
on what this next sprint looks like the
11 weeks between now
and the end of april we're going to be
doing three things
first of all if you're in one of the
groups who've already been
asked to come forward for vaccination
and you're one of the few people who
haven't chosen to do so
you still can do that so although as the
prime minister says
uptake has been fantastic we thought
that perhaps three quarters of people
would accept the
offer to be vaccinated for people aged
17 above as the prime minister says
that's over
90 percent nevertheless if you haven't
yet taken up that opportunity
you still can do so get back in touch
with
the nhs with your local gp and that will
be arranged
the second thing we're going to be doing
between now and the end of april
is making sure that people get the
second booster doses
for those who have already had their
first dose and that will particularly
begin from early to mid march
as uh 12 weeks on from the first
vaccinations
occurs we are reserving the vaccines
that are needed
for that and you will go back to
the same place where you had your first
vaccination
and if you don't already have an
appointment for that don't worry
the nhs will contact you to set up that
second booster shot
and then of course the third thing we're
going to be doing between now and the
end of april
is extending the offer to a larger group
of people
in fact more people uh in this next
group than we've
vaccinated in the first group since the
beginning of the program through to
today and for people aged 65
to 69 as the prime minister says you
will be getting
letters today tomorrow this week
inviting you to book in for your
vaccination
in the first instance we are inviting
you to consider doing so at one of the
larger vaccination centers
or the pharmacists who are part of the
program
but if that's not convenient for you you
can hold on and you will be contacted by
your
local gp the reason we're doing that
is we want the gps who together have
done about three quarters of all the
vaccinations so far
to use the next several weeks to focus
particularly
on more than six million people who have
got
underlying health conditions that put
them at higher risk
and given the relationship they've got
with their local practice uh and the
long-term health conditions that the gps
are already familiar with managing
that makes sense for the gps to be
focusing on that group of people
over the next several weeks those for
example are people with diabetes
with heart problems with severe learning
disabilities
or mental illnesses if you're in one of
those categories
your gp locally will be in touch with
you
asking you to come forward for
vaccination
but we're also going to be offering
vaccination to
younger adults living in care homes or
communal settings
as well as to eligible adult carers
and they will be also contacted by
letter
through the national booking service
so in a nutshell wait for the nhs to get
in touch with you
invites will be on a rolling basis uh
when it's your turn
because in this uh next phase this
second sprint
actually we're going to be vaccinating a
larger number of people
than in the first sprint and overall
although supply will vary
uh week to week and we'll have to adjust
accordingly we may be giving
up to twice as many vaccinations overall
given we've got to be doing the second
doses as well
than we've done in the first sprint so i
think in conclusion
a big thank you to the public for
helping us get this right
an enormous thanks to staff and
volunteers
and partners across the health service
for getting this done
and if you'll uh forgive coining the
phrase the prime minister i think what
my colleagues across the health service
are saying is give us the tools the
vaccines and we will finish the job
well thank you very much simon we
certainly intend to
do everything we can to give you give
you those vaccines
let's go to sarah from basic state
given the likely need for an autumn
covered vaccine booster
and then possibly one annually
thereafter how will the nhs cope with
the ongoing pressure to vaccinate
millions of people quickly
on an almost never-ending cycle and be
able to resume a more normal health
service provision
at the same time well thanks sarah my
instinctive answer is
the nhs already uh runs massive
vaccination programs for
uh for flu every every year but perhaps
so
uh chris and simon might want to answer
that one chris you want to go first
should i get a medical answer yeah i'm
sure i mean
in terms of uh covered re-vaccination
there are there are essentially two
reasons potentially to do this
uh one of which is if immunity is
starting to wane and we don't really
know how long
we will have to have between
re-vaccinations it might be long period
it might be short this too early
really to tell and the second reason is
if we
end up with variants of the virus
that can escape around the immunity
which the vaccine provides
and there's i think reasonable evidence
that we may have to do that this year
because there are several variants that
look very similar to one another
in many ways uh which actually could uh
have slightly reduced not completely
reduced but slightly reduced or
in some cases more than slightly reduced
effectiveness
from the vaccine in which case we then
redesign the vaccine
scientists redesign the vaccine and that
allows to re-vaccinate against the new
variant
but how regularly we will have to do
this and whether it has to be the whole
population
or as it's more common with for example
flu
just limiting it to those who've got the
highest risk from health
we'll have to see and it'll probably
vary uh year by year but i don't think
they should be seen as we're having to
do something on this scale
continuously i think it'll be more
limited and dependent on how frequently
have to do it
so just adding to what chris has said i
think
the first thing to say is that we've
obviously got many thousands of
volunteers who've come back to help
and even if not all of them are
vaccinating right now
over time during the course of the year
we will be asking them to
help out this morning i was in oxford at
one of our vaccination centers
the st john's ambulance doing a
fantastic job uh training volunteers to
help with the program
in coventry on friday where i was
talking to a retired nurse who'd come
back to help
so i think we can expand to the number
of people who are helping
over and above the uh usual uh nhs
workforce
and as vaccine supply increases we'd
expect that
uh more pharmacists high street
pharmacists will be able to do more of
the
uh vaccinations as well in the way that
would normally happen during a flu
season
thanks very much as the role of high
street pharmacist is incredibly
important uh
hannah from glasgow more and more people
are feeling the weight of the epidemic
now
and seeking support for their mental
health but feeling totally
lost um i'm personally very concerned
about some friends of mine who have
displayed worrying changes in behavior
but don't know where to turn will the
government commit to a mental health
spokesperson at the next chronovirus
briefing
to set out to the public how they can
access mental health support
well hannah i think that's actually a
very a good idea because
there's no question that as this goes on
and the
lock down continues uh the stresses and
strains are really
alas i think beginning to to tell on
on people and um it's
very important for everybody to realize
that nhs mental health services are
still there for you
uh you should use them uh if if you need
them
we've put a lot more money into
supporting them and
another 500 million pounds into
supporting nhs
mental health on top of the 12 or 13
billion
investment but it's it's very important
that people
make use of those services uh if they
if they need them uh it's also important
to uh to to reach out to the voluntary
sector
uh the mental health charities that the
government is also supporting they can
all
uh be of great assistance as well so
hannah i think you're making a a a very
a very valid point and we'll try and
uh find the right uh the right person to
uh to say something
uh about how to how to do this and how
to encourage everybody
really to look after our mental
well-being
and and try and keep going through this
uh through this pandemic because
i hope that there isn't that much longer
to go now but you know clearly people
have been under
uh a lot of pressure and and we've got
we've got to
address that anything you want to add
simon to that or
chris just one thing just to add just
because it's uh
starting today uh is that one of the
next priority groups is people who have
got
significant mental health problems so
things like significant schizophrenia or
significant bipolar spectrum disorders
so i think it's it's important that
people are supported to get vaccination
that's obviously separate too and
additional to the points that pm was
making more widely
and just just uh thinking how one of the
people that we could perhaps get up to
uh
to talk a bit about how we're tackling
the the issue is dr alex george who
uh who i've been appointed as uh as our
special
uh representative the government special
representative on these mental health
issues particularly as they
affect young people so i think we'll get
alex up and
uh and perhaps some others as well thank
you very much hannah let's go to
alex forsyth of the bbc thank you very
much
uh prime minister you say you want this
to be the last lockdown but can you
really give that guarantee given the
unpredictable nature
of this pandemic and does that mean
we're looking at a very gradual easing
of restrictions should we rule out
get-togethers and getaways at easter
for example uh alex no i can't give that
guarantee you've of course not because
we're we're battling with a uh with
nature with a disease that is capable of
uh mutating and and changing
uh i'm increasingly confident i'm
increasingly optimistic
about the uh the sheer uh
extent of the possibilities are opening
up with
with vaccinations i i'll be setting out
as much of a timetable as we can give on
the
on the 22nd and i'm you know i'm i'm
very hopeful that we'll be able to go
ahead uh and and open things up and
and and i'll be saying that but to say i
can give an absolute
uh cast iron uh guarantee that uh we
won't face further difficulties and
uh you know have to think harder and
deeper about some problems
uh no hannah uh sorry alex at this stage
i can't
uh but um i don't want people to think
that
uh i'm not optimistic i think there's
been a big
change and uh the
the the big change is that science is
now unquestionably in the ascendancy
over the disease and that's manifested
in all sorts of ways
not just through vaccination but also
with better therapies and they're
getting better
the whole time so you know people should
be
very very much encouraged by what's
going on at the moment
but we want to set out a timetable that
is
uh realistic and that means one that is
obviously
cautious and takes account of the real
state of the pandemic
i need to add that no fine thank you
thank you very much alex
uh carl did an itv thank you prime
minister
i just like to find out how cautious you
intend to be
once you have got schools reopened
fully as you hope to do on the 8th of
march will you wait
then to see what effect the reopening of
schools has
had on the rate of infections before you
open up
anything else and how long might that
take and also do you think that
you will be able to announce any other
lifting of restrictions at the same time
as
as you make your announcement whatever
it may be on schools for example
do you think you might be able to tell
people they can at least start
socializing outdoors and one quick one
for
chris witty if i may i think you have
said in the past the first place that we
will see the effect
in the data of the vaccination program
is on the death rate do you think we're
seeing that yet and if not
when would you expect to see it carl
i mean great questions but again really
as i said to to alex or perhaps as i
didn't say to
to alex i think the the the we'll be
setting out i'll be setting out as much
as
as i possibly can but we don't really
yet have
sufficient clarity on the the data
uh to be sure now today as of this
monday the the 15th uh exactly what
we'll be able to say to you
on uh monday the 22nd
and that's because the data becomes
clearer
with every day that passes we have to
continue uh to evaluate and also
uh to be absolutely uh clear with you
carl
these decisions uh we will take in the
course of this week but they're not yet
taken and um i would just
humbly advise anybody uh you know
reading
uh accounts of of what we're going to do
or uh
hearing about accounts of what we're
going to do at such and such time
in the course of the next few months uh
uh to take them with us a pinch of salt
folks because
uh this is still
speculation when i i explain
on the 22nd uh what we're going to do
you'll be hearing it
directly from me on a specific question
you asked me we're obviously putting
a lot of effort into trying to link
together data on uh
vaccination status compared to both
admission to hospital as a marker of
severe disease
and of people who die which obviously
happens slightly later
i think the earliest indications would
imply there's some effect but i think
it's too early to be able to put a
number on that
the obviously israel is particularly far
ahead in its vaccination program
and there there is some evidence of
effects
we would expect to see some evidence
that is strong enough to be able to put
into the public domain
uh in the next few weeks thanks
carl sam coatsky prime minister you
warned this morning that no
vaccination program is 100 effective
can you just spell out what you mean by
that and the implications of that
and professor chris whittie what are the
implications of this for
protecting public health do you think
some social distancing measures will now
become permanent
thanks very much sam well i'll ask
obviously i'll ask
chris also to comment on this point
about the effectiveness of vaccine
vaccination programs um
but clearly there will be some people if
you have a vaccine
a vaccine that is that is 80 or 90
effective whatever the
the figure is there'll be at least some
people logically who will
uh not uh benefit from it as much as
others
we think and and therefore you know
there's no vaccination program that we
know that is 100
uh effective in protecting everybody who
gets the vaccination
from disease we think and we have good
reason to think that
both the vaccines were you currently
using also
obviously there are more coming down the
track both of them are
effective in offering you a high degree
of protection
against uh serious disease
or or death and that's a that's a great
thing
uh we're unable at the moment uh
sam precisely to to quantify
what that means in terms of driving down
the incidence of uh the pandemic in this
country how fast
uh that can go and that's why
we just have to be cautious at the at
the moment
as as chris was just saying we've seen
so we've got some
straws in the wind there's some
interesting data from
from israel israel but
we we just need to wait a little bit
longer before we can uh talk with
authority about
the effectiveness of the overall program
we know it's going to work
this it's the speed at which it works is
really
uh what it was still waiting to to see i
think it's fair to say
and in terms of um uh the well firstly
on the general point about the vaccines
uh the effect of this as i tried to lay
out right at the beginning will build so
people's first vaccines second vaccines
then everyone they meet being vaccinated
and the whole population
being vaccinated in the longer term we
hope the whole world being vaccinated
because
it has been repeatedly said and rightly
said that no one is safe until everyone
is safe
but what that means is this the risk
will gradually go
down so it won't suddenly move from a
you having to do everything
to nothing this is going to be gradually
little by little we will de-risk it
and other bits of medical science like
improved treatment
uh trial positive trial results last
week for example really excellent news
about oculus map
uh though the effects of all of these
together will
gradually reduce the risk of this but
uh it will whether it'll get it down to
the point where
it's zero for all time or whether it'll
take it down to a very low level where
there's some residual there's course or
a level
where very occasionally you have to do
things in particular points in the
season for example
i think it's too early to say clearly
the hope is we get to a point where the
minimum
effort is used by things like any kind
of social distancing
and by far the majority or all of the
heavy lifting
is done by vaccination drugs and the
basic things like washing hands which
people should be doing anyway
what's the name of that drug again chris
what is it man chocolate is a map
talk talk easy talk begin to get this
right
is it talk talk zulu map near enough
yeah
something like that can we go this is
one we've got to get we've got to make
sure we get this right
talk there you go okay we're gonna have
to know that as well as you know dexter
method
tokilizumab folks that's the one and
that and that helps to drive down
um mortality as well on top of the
steroids already another
very good trial done here in the uk
thanks to the nhs and the national
institute of health research nihr
tokuluzumab okay good thank you uh
jasmine cameron celestia from the ft
thank you we know that there are main
ongoing concerns surrounding vaccine
hesitancy and uptake
particularly among ethnic minorities and
social care workers
currently there isn't publicly available
nhs data detailing how many people have
turned down
their offer of a vaccine would the
government be open to publishing more
detailed information on vaccine uptake
on what specific steps has the
government taken to address issues
relating to vaccine hesitancy and the
spreading of disinformation
particularly among minority groups and
lastly
prime minister you said this morning
that the government wouldn't be keen on
using vaccine passports within
facilities such as pubs
but how does the government intend to
prevent companies from mandating that
all employees
all customers have to have some form of
proof of vaccination before being able
to use their services
thank you thanks um
so well it's time once you get the
photos so jasmine you're completely
right there is a real concern about the
um hesitancy on the part of some black
and south asian
communities to accept the vaccine offer
that they're receiving either at work if
they're a health and social care worker
or as a member of the public what is
happening about that
is that there is a huge effort involving
community leaders
faith leaders the way in which the nhs
itself is administering the vaccine
program
to overcome that and although the start
was slower in terms of the uptake in
some of those communities i think we are
now seeing
meaningful progress for example in
hackney this past weekend
we were vaccinating at a mosque and also
at an orthodox uh
jewish uh site after uh shabbat
finished vaccinating up until midnight i
was uh
with one of the lead imams uh this
morning in oxford
uh who'd arranged for a uh zoom uh
with one of the top shakes uh in the
world to help explain
why uh vaccines are safe as well as why
they work
so i think this will build momentum and
let's face it part of what we're up
against is a
dual epidemic we're up against the
epidemic the pandemic of kovid
and we're up against a pandemic of
disinformation and the deliberately
sowing of mistrust and we've got to
fight both with equal vigor
on your data point by the way we do
publish weekly the
uptake by different ethnic groups
and at a local area we share with local
directors of public health the uptake
uh in a very granular way while
protecting people's medical
confidentiality
and we're certainly going to continue
publishing uh more and more data as we
have it
while nevertheless as i say protecting
individuals and families own
confidentiality
yes this is absolutely essential and i
think
just to repeat in a sense something
which uh simon said
many people may not take it up
immediately but will take it up
subsequently so it's not a matter of
refusal it's a matter of thinking about
it
and then actually moving on to do so all
of us
think this is critical to support people
to make sure we combat
misinformation in fact the next meeting
i've got this evening after this one
is with leaders of the medical
profession from
lots of different ethnic groups to share
experiences and share how we can work
out how to make sure that people
are getting absolutely accurate
information that
makes clear that the risks of the
vaccine are
massively lower than the risk of getting
this infection and the vaccine will
protect from this infection
and in the long run that is the way we
actually need uh to combat this disease
is by
the much safer route of vaccination
rather than the very significant risks
that go with this infection for many
people
and jasmine on your very good question
about um vaccine passports which
obviously a lot of people are talking
about now around the world
and in this country some countries
clearly are going to
be wanting to insist that people coming
to
their country uh have a evidence of of a
vaccination
just as uh people have insisted i think
in the past that
uh you have evidence that you're
vaccinated against yellow fever or
uh or or other diseases i think for
purposes of of this country and and
doing things
within the domestic uk economy i think
what we're
we'll look at everything but what we're
thinking of at the moment is is
is more of a route that relies on um
mass vaccination and
as you know we intend to vaccinate uh
all the adults in the in the country
uh by the autumn um
plus plus uh
lateral flow testing or testing uh rapid
testing
uh for those bits where you know it is
that have been the the toughest nuts to
crack as it were such as
uh nightclubs or theaters those parts of
the economy we couldn't get
open uh uh last year and
um i think that will be the the route
that we
uh that we go down and the businesses uh
will go down and you're already
jazz been seeing lots of businesses are
using the potential
of of rapid on the day testing as well i
think that in combination uh with
vaccination will probably be
uh the route forward i want to stress to
everybody it is still early days
there's lots of discussions uh still to
be uh to be had
uh can we go to uh dominic yeatman of
metro
thank you prime minister those in hotel
quarantine will be tested on days
2 and 8 of their stay and will have to
remain
for another 10 days if they test
positive will they be charged extra on
top of the
seventeen hundred and fifty pounds if
their release is delayed
what if they can't pay and what mental
health provision is being provided for
people stuck
alone in a room for so long and uh
quick one for simon if i may uh the uk
has been vaccinating
excuse me an average of uh 435 000
people a day since
early january at the current rate we
could vaccinate over
everyone over 50 by the end of march and
still stay on track with second doses
but the target date is the end of april
uh why is this do you expect a slowdown
in the rollout
i'll leave that one i'll leave that one
too i'll just quickly do the point about
um
um people in hotels uh
dominick you're worried about people who
may be asked to stay on for longer
because they test
their tests positive i think
obviously you've just got to bear in
mind that
it is currently illegal to travel abroad
for holidays anyway
uh we would expect people who who are
coming in
from one of these red list countries
to be able to cover their costs as for
mental health care
provision that you know that is very
important and
i will make sure that everybody has
access to to the treatment and to the
support
that they need
so i i would say dominic two things the
first thing is
as you pointed out as well as opening up
the invitations to more than 14 million
new people in england in the uh groups
that we're now talking about
we've also got the second doses to
administer for those who've had their
first dose
and when we look at the likely vaccine
supply that we will have available to us
uh between now uh and the end of april
uh that
appears to be um what we can do if
supply increases then we think we can go
faster but uh that at the moment is
represents still a doubling of the
number of vaccines delivered
over the next 11 10 or 11 weeks compared
to those that have been delivered over
the last 10 weeks so it's a pretty
substantial ramp up in this second
sprint that we're about to embark on
thank you both uh alistair smoot of
reuters
hi alastair smart from raiders thanks
for this um firstly to the chief medical
officer
as we've been hearing data on the real
world impact of vaccines in reducing
deaths but also transmission
will be key in drawing up this roadmap
out of lockdown
can you go into the specifics on how you
work out if it's vaccines bringing down
these numbers and reducing transmission
or if it's only falling because everyone
is under a national lockdown
and to the prime minister um on the
world health organization's
investigation in china and to the
origins of the pandemic you've said that
you support us president
joe biden in the need for transparency
who do you hold responsible for the lack
of transparency so far
and what actions are you planning to
take thanks
chris you want to do the question about
the first one i mean there's an
extremely long
answer the short answer is initially the
studies are being done with something
called case control studies
uh but um what we will hope to see
them in time is we'll actually see in
order the rates going down of severe
disease and
mortality exactly following the the
order in which people were vaccinated
and i think what we really want to get
to is the point where we can see in a
sense with the naked eye
the big effect of the vaccines rather
than having to do quite
complex calculations uh of of the
vaccinated against the unvaccinated
which is where we are at the moment so
that's very much the direction of travel
but if you look at the data for example
from israel
uh you actually can see the effect in
the uk we can calculate an effect but
it'll be much better when we can
actually see it when it's big enough to
actually be able to see
what we are seeing i think in some of
the early data from the nhs is
uh what looks like a signal in terms of
the impact on vaccination
but we really want to let the clock run
for another
uh week fortnight to be able to properly
validate that
and impact on transmission will take
longer to determine an impact on
mortality and severe disease
so alastair on your question about
uh what happened and how to and who to
hold accountable for for for
transparency i think it it's it's fairly
obvious that the
at the moment that uh the most of the
evidence seems to point to the disease
having originated
uh in uh in wuhan that seems to be
the way the consensus is at the moment
therefore i think we all need to see as
much as we possibly can
about how that might have happened uh
the
uh the zoonotic uh questions that people
are
asking i think we need as much data as
as possible and i think what the world
does what are we going to do about it
uh aleister i think what the world needs
to see is a general agreement
on uh on how uh we
uh track data of surrounding
zoonotic uh pandemics you want uh uh
zoonotic
research hubs around the world and
uh we want a general agreement on on
transparency and i think one of them
the attractive ideas that we've seen in
uh in the last few months has been
a proposal for a a global treaty on
pandemics
so that countries that say that
signatory countries uh make sure that
they
uh they contribute all the the data they
have and we
are able to get to the bottom what's
happened and stop it happening again i
think that
that is the sensible thing to do okay
everybody thank you
very much indeed thank you
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch bbc news live in the app and get
the full story with
dot co dot uk forward slash news follow
the story for all the latest with bbc
news